The Normans (literally "northern men") were Viking conquerors (of Scandinavian origin, mainly Danish) who occupied northwestern France (what is known as Normandy) in the second half of the 9th century. Under the leadership of Hrolf Ganger, who adopted the French name Rollo or Rollon, they swore loyalty to the king of France (Charles the Simple) and received from him what would later become the Duchy of Normandy.

The Nordic sagas offer us extensive information about their original culture: they professed a polytheistic religion with numerous supernatural beings (there is news of this in the Eddas), they knew runic writing, they were organized into family clans and had basic agriculture and livestock based on self-sufficiency, however, they were expert sailors, building light and resistant ships. However, contemporary chronicles do not mention Scandinavian social structures such as the thing (assemblies of free men) or hundreds on Norman soil, but rather a typically feudal structure, non-existent in Denmark and the Danelaw of England.1​

The Normans in part of former Neustria gradually adopted Christianity, French culture and language, creating a cultural identity that brought together the cultures of their Scandinavian ancestors and the local natives. All under the sovereignty of the Kingdom of France, forming a very powerful duchy with its own characteristics such as great maritime skill.

By expanding beyond Normandy they played an important role in medieval Europe: a group of Norman adventurers established themselves by conquest in the Kingdom of Sicily in southern Italy, and an expedition orchestrated by Duke William led to the Norman conquest of England. From these two new centres of power Norman influence spread to the entire British Isles and to the Crusader states of the Middle East.

The reasons for their migrations were many: search for better places, flight or expulsion of tribes defeated in internal struggles, commercial desires, spirit of adventure, desire for conquest, among others.
The Norman conquest of England was the invasion and occupation of England in the 11th century by an army made up of Normans, Bretons, Flemings and French led by Duke William II of Normandy, who would later be known as William the Conqueror (r. 1066-1087, in England).

William claimed the English throne based on his kinship with the Anglo-Saxon king Edward the Confessor, who had no descendants, a circumstance that encouraged the Norman's hopes of achieving his enthronement. Edward died in January 1066 and was succeeded by his brother-in-law Harold Godwinson. King Harald III of Norway invaded northern England in September 1066 and won a victory at the Battle of Fulford, but was defeated by Harold at the Battle of Stamford Bridge on 25 September of that year. William had already landed in southern England and Harold quickly marched there to meet him, although leaving much of his army in the north. On 14 October 1066 the two armies met at the Battle of Hastings, which resulted in William's victory and Harold's death in battle.

Although William eliminated his main rival, the Normans were few in number and he still had to deal with numerous rebellions in the following years, a Danish invasion and an attack by the Scots, so that he was not able to secure his throne until 1072. The lands of the English aristocrats who resisted were confiscated, while some of them went into exile. In order to control the kingdom, William gave land to his serfs by turning confiscated lands into fiefs, to enforce his authority, and built fortresses and castles throughout the country. William appointed Norman bishops and abbots and introduced changes at court. French was spoken at court, which would influence the development of English vocabulary and syntax. Other changes affected the agricultural classes and rural life, where the greatest impact seems to have been the formal abolition of slavery, which may or may not have been related to the invasion. There were minor alterations in the structure of government, as the Normans assumed many of the forms of the previous Anglo-Saxon administration and with them feudalism reached its peak. William died in 1087 during the battle against Philip I of France for the conquest of the city of Nantes.

Upon William's death, his sons Robert and William II the Red (r.1087–1100) inherited Normandy and England, respectively. Between 1087 and 1096 there were revolts by nobles who wanted to unite the two kingdoms. In 1096, Robert responded to Urban II's call for a crusade, financed by William II with a pledge of Normandy. Upon William II's death, his brother was crowned king.